# OOP Basics with C# questions

## .NET Framework

1. What is .NET?
    (framework by MSFT / consists of libraries, compilers, CLR (common language runtime) / fr.w. & lang. both my MSFT)
2. Can you describe the difference between .NET Framework and .NET Core?
    (.NET FW -> MSFT only, .NET Core -> multi-platform (open-source, optimized, side-by-side versioning))
3. What project types do you know in Visual Studio/Rider?
    (VS -> Windows specific, Both support Console, Unit Test, ASP.NET Web App, Class Library, Desktop)
4. What is a solution? (Container to organize more related projects together
    (.sln file with info about details, config, depend.) / build & deploy all together by keeping relationships and dependencies )
5. What is an assembly?
    (compiled code unit used for deployment and versioning // Contains: executable code (exe for apps, dll for libraries, manifest or description, classes and other resource files))
6. What is LINQ in .NET? How does it work?
    ("Language Integrated Query" / .NET feature, imported from System.Linq -> work efficiently with large datasets (using the IEnumerable interface) / Query & Method syntax)
7. What are some commonly used LINQ methods that you know? 
    (From, Where, Select, OrderBy, GroupBy, Any, ToList -> Also List operations, eg Count())
8. Which .NET class would you use if you need to generate random numbers? Explain its usage briefly.
    (System.Random is in base system -> Create random obj -> generate a random number with Next() or NextDouble() method / for testing add seed when creating new Random(123))
9. Which .NET classes are used to read and write files in C#?
    (System.IO.File /.Streamreader/writer -> work with files directly or streams (more control, benefitial with larger files as its line-by-line) / use with using to dispose instantly)
10. Which .NET type is used for working with dates? Describe some of the functions related to this type.
    (System.DateTime -> DateTime object -> .Now .Today. new Datetime("2024", "1", "12") .AddDays(-1) / Get indiv elements .GetYear .GetDate)
11. Which .NET class can be used for measuring time? 
    (System.Diagnostics.Stopwatch -> measures time by generating a Timespan object -> instantiate, .Start(), operations, Stop(), stopwatch.Elapsed..., .Reset() or .Restart() )
12. What is NuGet?
    (Package manager for .NET (command line or UI), add/remove/update packages, auto-reference into project and also add dependencies, restore packages when building a project)
13. What is the `IEnumerable` interface?
    (System.Collections namespace -> unifies access to collection types (they all implement it) (polymorphism) / IEnumerable has GetEnumerator() -> gets you an IEnumerator() -> has MoveNext() and .Current / if saving to a var or List, add toList!)
14. What does the term _deferred execution_ mean? How does it relate to `IEnumerable` and LINQ?
    (Only executes, when it really needs it -> IEnumerable gets items 1-by-1, and only starts if there is an iteration -> LINQ operators also work like this, as the implement it, but others onforce immediate execution (ToList) )
15. Describe some collection types you know.
    (Array, List, Dictionary, HashSet, Queue & Stack / generic vs non-generic (use "<T>" ))
16. Why does the `System.String` type implement the `IEnumerable` interface? What are the advantages of this?
    (To be able to handle it as a collection -> iterate through Char types in it / we can also use indexing and LINQ methods)

## Language features

17. What control statements are available in C#?
    (selection st. "if-else", "switch" / iteration st. or loop "for", "foreach", "while", "do-while" / jump st. "break", "continue", "return", "throw")
18. What is the difference between a `for` loop and a `foreach` loop?
    (for - more control over index, specify range, refer to items other than the current, add logic (eg every second item) / foreach - iterate through all items)
19. What is a `while` loop?
    (iterate while a condition is true / unknown times / +do-while)
20. What does the `yield` keyword do?
    (used with IEnumerable, returns a collection of items, 1-by-1, from a loop - same as returning a collectio of items by adding them to a list first)
21. How do you manually break out of a loop?
    (jump st. "break", "continue", "return", "throw")
22. What does the `var` keyword mean?
    (it's a container for an item, which type is determined by the compiler (eg. we don't know it at creation, eg with an API) / must be initialized, to determine the type!)
23. What is the _primary constructor syntax_?
    (it's the method that is called, when a Class is instantiated / default constructor is a parameterless constructor, that is generated by the compiler if there is none specified / maybe they refer to the base() constructor during inheritance?)
24. What is the meaning of the `params` keyword? Where would you use it?
    (used to pass multiple params of a variable length to a function / last item / just 1 params)
25. What are _lambda expressions_? How are they used in C# development?
    (they are simplified function declarations for anonymous functions, which use an arrow operator. Used with LINQ or other higher order functions)
26. What is the difference between a jagged array and a multidimensional array?
    (multidim: rectangular [,] or multidim [,,] represent a matrix (all items are the same length, stored as 1 block of memory / jagged: an array of different arrays (diff lengths!), each array has a separate ref in the memory))
27. What is the difference between `const` and `readonly` fields in C#?
    (both make fields immutable / const: only declared directly (no reference types can be stored! / readonly: values can be assigned through the constructor - can store ref or computed values))

## Type system

28. What are primitive types in C#? Give some examples.
    (built-in value types: Num/Int(`byte`, `int`, `short`, `long`); Num/Float(`float`, `double`, `decimal`); Text(`char`); Boolean(`bool`))
29. What is the difference between value types and reference types?
    (REF: point to a memory location on the HEAP, where the actual object is (eg Classes, String / VALUE: hold data directly, can't be null, built-in types + Enum + DateTime; Struct is a value type class / Copying is different / passing to methods as params(pass as value, where ref is the value)))
30. What is a class in C#?
    (a blueprint from which objects/instances are created. Defines a type by encapsulating data and behaviour (members))
31. What is a constructor?
    (a special method in a class that is called when a new instance is created / default = parameterless, generated by compiler / they assign inital values to it's members or can call other methods/calculations / constructor overloading / derived class constuctor)
32. Is it possible to have multiple constructors in a class?
    (Yes, with constructor overloading)
33. What are properties in C#?
    (they are members, that are used to add values to fields or just return their values using setters and getters / can have extra logic to restrict data, if the getters or setters are backing fields, not just auto-implemented)
35. What is the difference between an auto-property and a property with a backing field?
    (auto property just uses {get; set;} that we can give access modifiers to / backing fields can add extra logic, eg to restric what data can be stored in the filed set { fieldname = value; })
34. Describe the different types of properties: read-only, init-only, and computed properties.
    (read-only: can't be set, just through the constructor at instantiation / init-only: almost the same, but we don't need to add to the constructor (its value can be assigned once, during instantiation var person1 = new Person { Name = "Alice" }; / computed: in the constructor we can add a computed value using 2 other props))
36. What is an enum in C#?
    (value type, that is used when we have a specified number of options for a value (eg daysofweek). Each constant represents an integral value, but these are replaced with descritive names)
37. Explain the difference between a class and a struct.
    (struct: value type, stored on stack; it's members contain a copy of the original data (except ref or out keywords); no inheritance, can't be a base class (no abstract or virtual keywords); can't have parameterless constuctor, always initialized with values; can be initiated without "new", but only initiated if all the members's values were assigned)
38. Explain the difference between a class and a record.
    (record: ref type, but immutable by default, but we can use it as a modifier both for structs and classes / use value based equality, not ref based like classes / all members can be added just like classes )
39. What are interfaces? Why should we use them?
    (they define a contract that describes how different parts of the progtam should communicate with each other / contain the public props and methods a class must implement / good, becaused its an abstract type -> classes should depend on abstractions, not implementations -> easier testing / multiple interfaces can be implemented, but only 1 class )
40. What is inheritance?
    (a concept used to organize your classes and create class hierarchies / base/parent derived/child class / collects shared funtionality of shild classes / all except private members and constructors are inherited / abstract -> must have a child / sealed -> can't inherit from)
41. Is multiple inheritance allowed in C#?
    (a class can only inherit from 1 class at a time (otherwise diamond problem), but on as many levels as needed)
57. What is casting?
    (part of polymorphism concept / up -> the derived class is treated as the parent / down - the parent is treated like the child (unsafe, and must be explicit using cast operator "Child child = (Child)baseinstance" used with "is" and "as" to check))
58. What is the difference between `is` and `as` operators in C#?"
    ("is" is used to check in an if statement, if the downcast would work / "as" is used to do and explicit downcast, that if fails returns null "Dog dog = animal as Dog;" ...then we can check if dog != null to continue the operation)
42. What is a `static` class?
    (a class that can't be instantiated (no constructor, all members also static) / used for global access (utility function or extension methods) / eg. Math, Console)
43. What are the dangers of using static classes? How can we avoid them?
    (they use global state, so multiple objects can access them (one might not be aware of the other) / lifetime during the app's lifetime / can't be mocked or substituted -> Unit test issues / Use interfaces instead, dependency injection / use them only for extension methods and as utility classes)
44. What are _extension methods_?
    (a static class that adds additional methods to a class, without modifying it => create new extension class as static -> use this keyword on the method's first param, so it can be called in the instance of the type that is the first param)
46. What is _overloading_ in C#?
    (static polymorphism -> create multiple methods or constructors with the same name, that only differ in the number and type of parameters they have)
45. What does the `virtual` keyword mean in C#?
    (dynamic polymorphism -> represents a method in the parent class, that a derived class might overwrite / use with overwrite)
55. What does the `abstract` keyword mean in C#? (see below)
56. What is an `abstract` class?	
    (dynamic polymorphism & OCP -> an incomplete method that the derived class must implement (similar to an interdace) / use with overwrite)
47. What are nullable value types?
    (value types can't hold null by default -> add ? to make it be able / null coalescing operator ?? check if value is null)
48. What is the `IDisposable` interface used for?
    (used to free up resources that are only needed temporarily (eg connections, streams) / these objects implement IDisposable interface, because they need explicit cleanup / putting them in a using statement makes this process automatic)
49. What does the `using` keyword do? When would you use it? (see below)
50. What is the difference between a using block and a using statement?
    (using as a directive block "using System" for referring to a namespace / using as a statement to define a scope, at the end of which an object will be disposed automatically (connections, streams))
51. How is it possible to use functions as objects in C#? (see below)
52. What is a `delegate`? (see below)
53. Describe the `Func<TResult>` delegate. (see below)
54. Describe the `Action` delegate.
    (we can treat them as objects with delegates (Func<> and Action<>), that refers to a method (need mathcing signatures!) / Func returns something and has params / Action only does something, but returns void)

## Architecture

59. Explain the Single Responsibility Principle.
    (A class or method should have only one job or responsibility / organize code by functionality, inheritance over composition principle)
60. Explain the Interface Segregation Principle.
    (A class shouldn't be force to implement methods it doesn't use -> better to have multiple, smaller interfaces, divided by functionality)
64. Explain the Open/Closed principle.
    (the code modules should be open for extension, but closed for modification -> use base classes and derived classes / example: abstract Shape base class / Rectangle, Circle, Triangle child classes / AreaCalculator abstract method )
65. Explain the Liskov Substitution Principle.
    (objects of a base class should be replaceable with it's children without breaking the code (upcasting) / You learn to drive a Car, not a Ford / A list of animal types can contain different animal subclass instances)
66. Explain the Dependency Inversion Principle.
    (the code modules shouldn't depend on implementations, but on abstractions -> implement interfaces / Inversion of control IoC -> all dependencies are created in Program class / Dep. inj. DI -> the dependencies should be added to the constructor)
61. What is _composition over inheritance_?
    (detemine if a new entity should be part of your class or should be a parent class by asking if it "has a" or if it "is a" / ElectricCar is a Car vs. ElecricCar has an Engine)
62. What is a model class? (see below)
63. What is a service class?
    (model -> represents data or data access (Repo) / service or business logic -> represents functionality or rules / UI -> represents display data and user interaction )
67. What do we mean by the Gang of Four (GoF) Design Patterns? Can you name some of these patterns?
    (GoF -> '94 book Design Patterns (4 writers) -> collection of design patterns: Creational, focus on object creation (Singleton, Factory), Structural, focus on object composition to form large structures (Adapter)), Behavioural, focus on object's communication with each other (observer) +1 Repository - abstraction layer for database/API
68. What are the risks associated with using the GoF design patterns?
    (misuse or overuse / designed for very specific scenarios / balance simplicity with the use of the patterns / scalability issues in some cases / SOLID vs pattern (eg. Adapter contradicts SRP as it does 2 things: convert, add extra logic before forwarding eg convert units))
69. What do we mean by YAGNI?
    ("You aren't going to need it!" / only add functionality when it's really needed)
70. What do we mean by SLAP?
    ("Single Level of Abstraction Principle" / each code module should work on a single level of abstraction, eg. a public method in a class just calling other private methods, as a todo list)
71. What do we mean by KISS?
    ("Keep It Simple, Stupid!" / avoid unnecessary complexity in coding)
72. What is the Repository Pattern?
    (a desing pattern that represents an abstraction layer for a database (between real data and business logic/service layers) / it shouldn't be concerned of what the data source is(web service, DB or else) / consists of CRUD operations and connection the setup)
73. What is a CRUD interface?
    (Create: `INSERT INTO` (SQL) + `POST` (HTTP) / Read: `SELECT FROM` + `GET` / Update: `UPDATE` + `PUT` or `PATCH` / Delete: `DELETE` + `DELETE`)

## Unit testing

74. Why is unit testing a good practice?
    (catch errors early - less debugging, ensure software quality (work as expected & efficient (CMM standards 1-5)), easier refactoring / test unit is a method / test in ISOLATION! / FIRST - Fast, Isolated, Repeateable, Self-check (pass or fail), Thorough (cover all edge cases and vary inputs))
75. What is NUnit?
    (testing framework for .NET / make calls to the original code's public methods / AAA Arrange, Act, Assert / [Test] attributes / good test has only 1 assertion and only tests a single state of change)
76. What is a parameterized test? (see below)
77. What options do you have in NUnit to create parameterized tests?
    (A test where we pass parameters: eg to run a test multiple times with different parameters) / [TestFixture] + [Setup] + [TestCase] or [TestCaseSource(nameof(Testcases))]
78. What is _mocking_?
    (a simulated object, that is used to replace a dependency, to test in ISOLATION) / its behaviour can be controlled and can be programmed with expectations / verifies that methods or dependencies have been called correctly
79. What is the difference between _mocking_, _stubbing_ and _faking_?
    (Test Doubles: simulate behaviour of real objects in program, to test in isolation) / Fake: have a working implementation, but simplified (eg to replace an external API with an in-memory DB) / Mock: verify behaviour, no working implementation, but can have pre-programmed expectations, used to check if interactions between the class and its dependencies work well / Stub: provide data that is required (return predefined values), no implementation or pre-programmed expectations

## Databases

80. What are relational databases? What are their advantages and disadvantages?
    (a collection of related tables, where data is stored in an orthogonal way / a table consists of columns (attributes) and rows (records) / A table is like a class, where each record is an instance / +++ SQL language, PK and FK to join tables (less duplicate data, data can grow independently) --- rigid schema, complex design, performance is slow on high volume)
81. How do you associate entities to each other in a relational database model?
    (using PK and FK - a FK represents the PK in another table, on which we can join / 1-1, 1-MANY / MANY-MANY relationships (Junction table with JOIN))
82. What are tables in a relational database?
    (DB -> collection of tables -> a table consists of columns (attributes) and rows (records) / A table is like a class, where each record is an instance / an attribute has constraints to define data)
83. What is a _primary key_?
    (attribute, that uniquely identifies each row/record in a database table, FK check for matchin PK in other tables to join / multiple fields with PK -> composite key)
84. What is a _foreign key_?
    (a column in one table that references the PK of another table)
85. What does the SQL abbreviation stand for? (see below)
    (Structured Language Query)
86. What are some of the SQL database providers that you’ve heard of?
    (SQLite, MySQL, Postgres, Microsoft SQL Server)
87. What are SQL data types? Are there any differences in data types between different SQL databases?
    (static typing postgres / dynamic typing SQLite / storage classes in SQLite NULL, INTEGER, REAL, TEXT, BLOB / postgres BOOL VARCHAR, Time&Date DATE, TIME, INTERVAL)
88. What are _constraints_ in SQL?
    (define the properties of a table's columns (the rules enforced on the data) / ensures accuracy / PRIMARY KEY, FK, (+SERIAL), NOT NULL, CHECK, DEFAULT)
89. How can we program different SQL databases in C#?
    (use the `ADO.NET` specification (a set of libraries, that unifies access to relational databases) / add NuGet package (`SQLite` for SQLite or `Npgsql` for PostgreSQL / Use Repository pattern (ref. and connect to DB, execute SQL commands & queries, dispose)))
90. Which SQL statement is used to create tables? Describe the syntax briefly.        
        CREATE TABLE contacts (
            contact_id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
            first_name VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL,
            phone TEXT NOT NULL UNIQUE
        );
91. Which SQL statement can be used to insert values? Describe the syntax briefly.
        INSERT INTO tableName (column1,column2 ,..)
        VALUES( :value1, :value2 ,...);
92. Which SQL statement can be used to update values? Describe the syntax briefly.
        UPDATE tableName SET sold = true WHERE product_id = :productId;
93. Which SQL statement can be used to delete rows?. Describe the syntax briefly.
        DELETE FROM tableName;      // Deletes all data from table
        DELETE FROM tableName WHERE user_id = :id;     // Delete by condition
94. Which SQL statement can be used to create queries?. Describe the syntax briefly.
        SELECT [DISTINCT] * // OR // column, another_column        // Add AS if you also want to rename the column's name
        FROM mytable;
95. How can you join tables together in SQL? When should you do it?
    (use it, if we would like to combine data from different tables)
        SELECT table1.column1, table2.columnX
        FROM mytable
        INNER JOIN another_table 
            ON table1.column1 = table2.columnX
    - `(INNER) JOIN`: Returns records that have matching values in both tables
    - `LEFT JOIN`: Returns all records from the left table, and the matched records from the right table
    - `RIGHT JOIN`: Returns all records from the right table, and the matched records from the left table
    - `FULL JOIN`: Returns all records when there is a match in either left or right table



